Ex aequo et bono  is a Latin phrase that is used as a legal term of art. In the context of arbitration, it refers to the power of arbitrators to dispense with consideration of the law but consider solely what they consider to be fair and equitable in the case at hand. However, a decision ex aequo et bono is distinguished from a decision on the basis of equity , "Whereas an authorisation to decide a question ex aequo et bono is an authorisation to decide without deference to the rules of law, an authorisation to decide on a basis of equity does not dispense the judge from giving a decision based upon law, even though the law be modified".

Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice  provides that the court may decide cases ex aequo et bono only if the parties agree. In 1984, the ICJ decided a case using "equitable criteria" in creating a boundary in the Gulf of Maine for Canada and the US. This was not, however, in relation to Art. 38 which has never been invoked by the parties in a dispute before the ICJ. It was an example of referring to 'equity' as a general principle of law under Art. 38  .

Article 33 of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law's Arbitration Rules  provides that the arbitrators shall consider only the applicable law unless the arbitral agreement allows the arbitrators to consider ex aequo et bono, or amiable compositeur, instead. This rule is also expressed in many national and subnational arbitration laws such as section 22 of the Commercial Arbitration Act 1984 . It is also embodied under Section 28 of the Indian arbitration law - Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 

On the other hand, the constituent treaty of the Eritrea–Ethiopia Claims Commission explicitly forbids the body from interpreting ex aequo et bono.

The phrase ex aequo  is used to mean "equally placed", often in the context of competition winners.

This legal article about a Latin phrase is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.

This article related to international law is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.

