A country's gross domestic product  at purchasing power parity  per capita is the PPP value of all final goods and services produced within an economy in a given year, divided by the average  population for the same year. This is similar to nominal GDP per capita, but adjusted for the cost of living in each country.

In 2019, the estimated average GDP per capita  of all of the countries of the world was Int$ 18,381. For rankings regarding wealth, see list of countries by wealth per adult.

The gross domestic product  per capita figures on this page are derived from PPP calculations. Such calculations are prepared by various organizations, including the IMF and the World Bank. As estimates and assumptions have to be made, the results produced by different organizations for the same country are not hard facts and tend to differ, sometimes substantially, so they should be used with caution.

Comparisons of national wealth are frequently made on the basis of nominal GDP and savings , which do not reflect differences in the cost of living in different countries  per capita); hence, using a PPP basis is arguably more useful when comparing generalized differences in living standards between economies because PPP takes into account the relative cost of living and the inflation rates of the countries, rather than using only exchange rates, which may distort the real differences in income.

This is why GDP  per capita is often considered one of the indicators of a country's standard of living, although this can be problematic because GDP per capita is not a measure of personal income. 

GDP  and GDP  per capita are usually measured by international dollar, which is a hypothetical currency that has the same purchasing power in every economy as the U.S. dollar in the United States.

All figures are in current international dollars, and rounded to the nearest whole number.

The table initially ranks each country or territory with their latest available year's estimates, and can be reranked by either of the sources.

* Nearly all country links in the table connect to articles titled "Income in " or to "Economy of ".

The share of the shadow economy is significant in many European countries, ranging from less than 10 to over 40 percent of GDP.
Since 2014, EU member states have been encouraged by Eurostat, the official statistics body, to include some illegal activities.

There are many natural economic reasons for GDP-per-capita to vary between jurisdictions .  However, it is increasingly being recognized that tax havens, or corporate tax havens, have distorted economic data which produces artificially high, or inflated, GDP-per-capita figures.  It is estimated that over 15% of global jurisdictions are tax havens . An IMF investigation estimates that circa 40% of global foreign direct investment flows, which heavily influence the GDP of various jurisdictions, are described as "phantom" transactions.

A stunning $12 trillion—almost 40 percent of all foreign direct investment positions globally—is completely artificial: it consists of financial investment passing through empty corporate shells with no real activity. These investments in empty corporate shells almost always pass through well-known tax havens. The eight major pass-through economies—the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Hong Kong SAR, the British Virgin Islands, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Ireland, and Singapore—host more than 85 percent of the world's investment in special purpose entities, which are often set up for tax reasons.

In 2017, Ireland's economic data became so distorted by U.S. multinational tax avoidance strategies , also known as BEPS actions, that Ireland effectively abandoned GDP  statistics as credible measures of its economy, and created a replacement statistic called modified gross national income .  Ireland is one of the world's largest corporate tax havens.

Ireland has, more or less, stopped using GDP to measure its own economy. And on current trends , the eurozone taken as a whole may need to consider something similar.

The statistical distortions created by the impact on the Irish National Accounts of the global assets and activities of a handful of large multinational corporations have now become so large as to make a mockery of conventional uses of Irish GDP.

A list of the top 15 GDP-per-capita countries from 2016 to 2017, contains most of the major global tax havens :

*Top country subdivisions by GDP

