A peninsula  is a piece of land that is bordered mostly by water but connected to mainland. The surrounding water is usually understood to be continuous, though not necessarily named as such. A peninsula can also be a headland, cape, island promontory, bill, point,
or spit. A point is generally considered a tapering piece of land projecting into a body of water that is less prominent than a cape. In English, the plural of peninsula is peninsulas or, less commonly, peninsulae. A river which courses through a very tight meander is also sometimes said to form a "peninsula" within the  loop of water.

Presented below is a list of peninsulas.

The Horn of Africa is a peninsula in Northeast Africa that juts into the Guardafui Channel, and is the easternmost projection of the African continent. It denotes the region containing the countries of Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Somalia.

Kazakhstan

The whole landmass encompassing North and South Korea is a peninsula, surrounded by the Sea of Japan to the east and south, and the Yellow Sea to the west and south, with the Korea Strait connecting them.

The Deccan Peninsula is a dominant geographical feature of the Indian Subcontinent.

Other peninsulas on the Indian Subcontinent include:

Europe is sometimes considered to be a large peninsula extending off Eurasia. As such, it is one of the largest peninsulas in the world and the only one to have the status as a full continent, largely as a matter of convention rather than science.  It is composed of many smaller peninsulas, the four main and largest component peninsulas being the Scandinavian, Iberian, Balkan, and Apennine peninsulas.

The Balkans is a peninsula including Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Kosovo, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and the European part of Turkey.

Encompassing continental Portugal and Spain, Andorra, Gibraltar , and a small amount of Southern France, the Iberian Peninsula is a dominant geographical feature of Iberia.

Other peninsulas in Iberia include:

The Apennine Peninsula is a dominant geographical feature of Italy.

Other peninsulas in Italy include:

Florida is a well-known example of a large peninsula, with its land area divided between the larger Florida peninsula and the smaller Florida Panhandle on the north and west. It has several smaller peninsulas within it:

Michigan – the only bi-peninsular state – is very distinguishable for its mitten-shaped Lower Peninsula which includes:

The rabbit-shaped Upper Peninsula of Michigan contains:

The Southern Cone, like Europe, is sometimes considered to be a large peninsula. Geographically, the peninsula encompasses most of Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Southern Brazil and the southernmost portion of Paraguay, which makes it one of the largest peninsulas in the world. Like the Indian Peninsula, the Southern Cone is sometimes considered to be a subcontinent.

